MySQL and Oracle Database for Developers and Designers - Course | UCSC Silicon Valley Extension
Skip to main content
Academics
Courses
Open for Enrollment
Short Courses - 30 Days or Less
New Courses
Spring Courses
View all Courses
Popular Specializations
Social Media Marketing
Python
Mobile Application Development
Administrative Professionals
View all Specializations
Popular Certificates
Database and Data Analytics
Project and Program Management
Computer Programming
Human Resources Management
View all Certificates
Popular Series
Digital Marketing Science
Sales Operation Science
Paralegal Studies
Legal Studies
View all Series
Open Campus / Concurrent Enrollment
The Open Campus Program, administered by UCSC Extension, allows you to enroll in courses offered on the UC Santa Cruz campus without being formally admitted to a degree program.
Learn More
Silicon Valley Startup Series
The Silicon Valley Startup series, offered in partnership with Silicon Valley Ignite, brings you the wisdom of business development experts in highly interactive, mentored courses for the new entrepreneur and the seasoned executive.
Learn More
Workforce
International
Info
Academic Calendar
Policies
Students with Disabilities
FAQ
Title IX External link
Resources
Forms
Concurrent Enrollment
Career Services
Tutoring Services
Course Catalogs
About
About UCSC Extension
Areas of Study
Instructors
Our UC Value
Digital Badges
Work for Us
Blog
Contact
Login
Course
MySQL and Oracle Database for Developers and Designers | DBDA.X409
Oracle and MySQL are both reliable database engines commonly used for storing and serving data as web content. They are popular among developers of open source platforms and projects on the Web. High volume major websites use them. They also have a significant user base in the enterprise database market. This course is intended for DB developers and designers who want to learn MySQL and Oracle technology in depth.
The course begins by reviewing the basic SQL queries, DDL and DML operations, data retrieval from multiple tables, and different types of storage engines in databases. It then introduces the aggregate, the index merge, data manipulation, and stored procedures in MySQL. You will learn to write complex queries and get hands-on experience with advanced features such as creating sub programs, data security, triggers, and dynamic SQL. You will also learn a performance tuning strategy, server configuration, loading techniques and the application architecture for efficient database design. This is a hands-on lab-based course designed to help students master MySQL features and tune for performance.
Learning Outcomes:
At the conclusion of the course, you should be able to:
Perform DDL and DML operations using SQL commands
Develop and manage database stored procedures including best practices
Develop Database Triggers to automate database operations
Understand Database Partitions and create tables with different types of partitions for improving database performance
Perform exception handling and error handling capabilities in both Oracle and MYSQL
Understand different strategies used for improving database performance through Database Indexes, Optimizer, Explain Plan, and database hints
Topics include:
Review of MYSQL and Oracle database essentials
Understanding MYSQL storage engines, transactions and features of the database and how it differs from Oracle
Performing DDL and DML operations using SQL commands
Retrieving data from multiple tables using JOINS
Writing complex queries using JOINS, SUBQUERIES and nested SUB QURIES
MYSQL functions including single-row, multiple-row, group and aggregate functions
Understanding Oracle and MYSQL optimizer and index merge method
Developing and managing database stored procedures including best practices
Exception handling and error handling capabilities in both Oracle and MYSQL
Utilizing database triggers to automate database operations
Oracle and MYSQL performance enhancements with queries and indexes
Database loading techniques and their effects on performance
Skills Needed: Students should have prior knowledge of the installation and basic operation of MySQL.
Have a question about this course?
First Name*
Last Name*
Email*
Phone Number
Question
Submit
Speak to a student services representative. Call (408) 861-3860
This course is related to the following programs:
Certificate Program in Database and Data Analytics
Course Availability Notification
Please use this form to be notified when this course is open for enrollment.
First Name*
Last Name*
Email*
Phone Number
Course Code
Course
Submit
Contact Us
Speak to a student services representative.
Call (408) 861-3860
Envelope extension@ucsc.edu
Subscribe
Stay up to date on new courses, upcoming events, and alumni activities.
Info
Academic Calendar
Policies
Students with Disabilities
FAQ
Title IX External link
Resources
Forms
Workforce Training
Concurrent Enrollment
Career Services
Course Catalogs
About
Areas of Study
Instructors
Our UC Value
Digital Badges
Work for Us
Contact Us
Map Icon Map & Directions
Phone Icon (408) 861-3700
Envelope Icon extension@ucsc.edu
Map Marker Icon 3175 Bowers Ave, Santa Clara, CA
LinkedIn
YouTube
Instagram
Twitter
Facebook
©2021 UCSC Silicon Valley Extension and its licensors. All rights reserved.
