MySQL - Force index degraded performance over time - Database Administrators Stack Exchange
Stack Exchange Network
Stack Exchange network consists of 176 Q&A communities including Stack Overflow, the largest, most trusted online community for developers to learn, share their knowledge, and build their careers.
Visit Stack Exchange
Loading…
Tour
Start here for a quick overview of the site
Help Center
Detailed answers to any questions you might have
Meta
Discuss the workings and policies of this site
About Us
Learn more about Stack Overflow the company
Business
Learn more about hiring developers or posting ads with us
Log in
Sign up
current community
Database Administrators
help
chat
Database Administrators Meta
your communities
Sign up or log in to customize your list.
more stack exchange communities
company blog
Unblock your team by capturing collective knowledge that anyone can find.
A private collaboration & knowledge sharing platform.
Learn more about Teams
“If there is one thing developers like less than writing documentation, it’s responding to unnecessary escalations […] and too many escalations wear down the developers.”
Tom LimoncelliSite Reliability Engineering Manager at Stack Overflow
Read blog post
“We needed a better place to store all the questions and answers that people were repeatedly asking, and we discovered Stack Overflow for Teams.”
Suyog RaoDirector of Engineering at Elastic Cloud
Listen to podcast
“We use Stack Overflow for Teams internally when onboarding new developers, and when new developers ask questions, everyone can benefit from the shared knowledge.”
Roberta ArcoverdePrincipal Software Developer at Stack Overflow
Listen to podcast
Home
Public
Questions
Tags
Users
Unanswered
Find a Job
Jobs
Companies
Teams
Stack Overflow for Teams
– Collaborate and share knowledge with a private group.
Create a free Team
What is Teams?
Teams
What’s this?
Create free Team
Teams
Q&A for work
Connect and share knowledge within a single location that is structured and easy to search.
Learn more
MySQL - Force index degraded performance over time
Ask Question
Asked
7 months ago
Active
7 months ago
Viewed
87 times
Last year we migrated data from our old product environment into a new environment with our new product.
Since the new product was still fresh, we found that some of the new queries were very slow after the migration. and we fixed several of them by adding the 'FORCE INDEX(SOME_INDEX)' to the queries join clauses. this immediately solved our problem and sped up the queries dramatically.
Lately we see some performance degradation in the new product again, and the same queries we optimized last year using the 'FORCE INDEX(SOME_INDEX)' are not faster without the force index part of it (basically using the original query from last year is now faster)
Someone at the office threw to the air the idea that mysql keeps his own statistics of its indexes and as the mysql server keeps working it become more efficient in creating the flow of the query. (meaning that at the beginning it has less statistics and thats why hinting to force index helps it, and after a year of production usage its own statistics are enough).
Is this correct? is there any other plausible explanation for this?
mysql performance index mysql-5.7 index-tuning
Share
Improve this question
Follow
edited Aug 25 '20 at 18:13
Urbanleg
asked Aug 25 '20 at 15:11
UrbanlegUrbanleg
33511 gold badge33 silver badges1313 bronze badges
It may help to tag the version number of MySQL you are using.
– bbaird
Aug 25 '20 at 16:36
Add a comment
1 Answer
Active
Oldest
Votes
Without any index hint, the Optimizer uses statistics to decide which index to use.
And it updates the statistics in a reasonably (but not always) intelligent manner.
With a hint, such as FORCE INDEX, it ignores the statistics and uses the given index if at all possible.
Probably the FORCE was beneficial at first.
But later the data in the table shifted due to new rows, changing distribution of values, or the phase of the moon.
And now that index is no longer optimal.
Your experience is why I warn people against using hints, saying "it may help today, but hurt tomorrow."
If you would like to discuss the specific query, please provide SHOW CREATE TABLE and EXPLAIN SELECT...
It may be that a different composite query, without the hint, will work even better than what you had or have.
More on the history...
The Optimizer was heavily worked on in 5.6, 5.7, and 8.0.
A big change was moving to a "cost-based" model.
In theory, it produces better results.
In practice, it rarely changes anything.
And, as perhaps your case shows, it sometimes hurts.
The presumption is that the cost-based model is usually better than the previous algorithm.
The statistics are updated when any of these happens:
The table grows by 10%.
(This partially addresses your coworker's theory.)
You run ANALYZE TABLE.
In rare cases, this is a "fix" for a bad index choice, but it may or may not stick.
Some flavors of ALTER.
Share
Improve this answer
Follow
answered Aug 25 '20 at 23:21
Rick JamesRick James
59.8k44 gold badges3636 silver badges8686 bronze badges
Add a comment
Your Answer
Thanks for contributing an answer to Database Administrators Stack Exchange!Please be sure to answer the question. Provide details and share your research!But avoid …Asking for help, clarification, or responding to other answers.Making statements based on opinion; back them up with references or personal experience.To learn more, see our tips on writing great answers.
Draft saved
Draft discarded
Sign up or log in
Sign up using Google
Sign up using Facebook
Sign up using Email and Password
Submit
Post as a guest
Name
Email
Required, but never shown
Post as a guest
Name
Email
Required, but never shown
Post Your Answer
Discard
By clicking “Post Your Answer”, you agree to our terms of service, privacy policy and cookie policy
Not the answer you're looking for? Browse other questions tagged mysql performance index mysql-5.7 index-tuning
or ask your own question.
The Overflow Blog
Level Up: Creative Coding with p5.js – parts 4 and 5
Understanding quantum computing through drunken walks
Featured on Meta
Stack Overflow for Teams is now free for up to 50 users, forever
Related
Filtered index statistics refresh threshold
SQL Index order and performance based on cardinality and data
SQL Server 2008 - Question about index behaviour
MySQL requires FORCE INDEX on huge table and simple SELECTs
MySQL 5.1 -> 5.6 problem, select distinct order by limit query stops using index
Select performance problems with conditional index vs non-conditional on large volume table
Is it worth the time to review indexes suggested by index tuning advisers?
Worse performance after create empty table
MariaDB (MySQL) slow query when primary key range combined with fulltext index
MySQL - single heavily indexed table queries runs fast until the first join with another table
Hot Network Questions
Can I ask my supervisor how long would it take to complete my PhD before beginning my PhD studies and post getting acceptance letter?
70s(?) film with rich folks using guns to burn trees for fun?
Do 90% of employees who accept a counteroffer still end up leaving after a year?
Why split the resistance on either side of an LED?
How did early laser printers get by with so little memory?
Which form of spelling is preferred when publishing for an English speaking audience?
Passive Cooling Techniques for Apartment Buildings
Why does pentatonic + diatonic embellishments sound so much better than just using the diatonic for guitar solos?
Model if-else statement
I am getting the wrong result for north coordinate
What kind of problems can a flight have if passenger weight is miscalculated?
How can I see if my oscillator works without using an oscilloscope?
Should the SpaceX Starship static fire tests more closely match actual flight parameters?
Is Yoda committing a fallacy?
What does “strongly correlated” mean?
How to handle when a player wants the DM to hard-bend the story for his/her epic idea of outcome?
What accounted for the cost of ENIAC?
Is lithium grease suitable for lubricating the steel headset cups when pressing them into the aluminium frame?
Does department receive funding for each PhD candidate
Is there a problem with grep command? I am getting characters that don't match my regular expression
Naturally occurring examples of badly behaved categories
How would you, as a teacher, decide if a particular topic/ concept should be tested as multiple-choice questions or as free-response questions?
Suspicious GitHub fork
Why does the First Amendment apply to states?
more hot questions
Question feed
Subscribe to RSS
Question feed
To subscribe to this RSS feed, copy and paste this URL into your RSS reader.
lang-sql
Database Administrators
Tour
Help
Chat
Contact
Feedback
Mobile
Company
Stack Overflow
For Teams
Advertise With Us
Hire a Developer
Developer Jobs
About
Press
Legal
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Cookie Settings
Cookie Policy
Stack Exchange Network
Technology
Life / Arts
Culture / Recreation
Science
Other
Stack Overflow
Server Fault
Super User
Web Applications
Ask Ubuntu
Webmasters
Game Development
TeX - LaTeX
Software Engineering
Unix & Linux
Ask Different (Apple)
WordPress Development
Geographic Information Systems
Electrical Engineering
Android Enthusiasts
Information Security
Database Administrators
Drupal Answers
SharePoint
User Experience
Mathematica
Salesforce
ExpressionEngine® Answers
Stack Overflow em Português
Blender
Network Engineering
Cryptography
Code Review
Magento
Software Recommendations
Signal Processing
Emacs
Raspberry Pi
Stack Overflow на русском
Code Golf
Stack Overflow en español
Ethereum
Data Science
Arduino
Bitcoin
Software Quality Assurance & Testing
Sound Design
Windows Phone
more (28)
Photography
Science Fiction & Fantasy
Graphic Design
Movies & TV
Music: Practice & Theory
Worldbuilding
Video Production
Seasoned Advice (cooking)
Home Improvement
Personal Finance & Money
Academia
Law
Physical Fitness
Gardening & Landscaping
Parenting
more (10)
English Language & Usage
Skeptics
Mi Yodeya (Judaism)
Travel
Christianity
English Language Learners
Japanese Language
Chinese Language
French Language
German Language
Biblical Hermeneutics
History
Spanish Language
Islam
Русский язык
Russian Language
Arqade (gaming)
Bicycles
Role-playing Games
Anime & Manga
Puzzling
Motor Vehicle Maintenance & Repair
Board & Card Games
Bricks
Homebrewing
Martial Arts
The Great Outdoors
Poker
Chess
Sports
more (16)
MathOverflow
Mathematics
Cross Validated (stats)
Theoretical Computer Science
Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Computer Science
Philosophy
Linguistics
Psychology & Neuroscience
Computational Science
more (10)
Meta Stack Exchange
Stack Apps
API
Data
Blog
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Instagram
site design / logo © 2021 Stack Exchange Inc; user contributions licensed under cc by-sa.
rev 2021.4.14.39087
Database Administrators Stack Exchange works best with JavaScript enabled
Your privacy
By clicking “Accept all cookies”, you agree Stack Exchange can store cookies on your device and disclose information in accordance with our Cookie Policy.
Accept all cookies
Customize settings
