ApexSQL September 2020 Newsletter
ApexSQL September 2020 Newsletter
Where did the summer go?
ApexSQL has been chugging along during the whole summer when, in general, many software companies typically tend to slow down a bit. Our engineering teams have been hard at work
bringing great new releases for the majority of our tools, and we'd like to highlight a few of them below:
What's fresh
The releases of new products and technologies i.e. Visual Studio Code and MySQL is cracking.
MySQL data compare
We got a brand new MySQL data comparison and synchronization tool, ApexSQL Data Diff for MySQL.
This tool can detect data differences between two databases and resolve them without any errors. Moreover, it allows users to:
Compare data between two MySQL databases
Customize object mapping
Select specific objects for comparison
Export comparison results to HTML, Excel, or CSV
Automate and schedule data synchronization
Create data synchronization scripts
Besides MySQL, it also supports Azure Database, Amazon RDS for MySQL and MariaDB. The list of
features is rather long, and therefore we encourage you to see the product update alert for the full list of features. Furthermore, here are some key resources to
help you get started with ApexSQL Data Diff for MySQL:
Getting started - a collection of resources to begin using ApexSQL Data Diff for MySQL quickly
Product page - learn more about what the MySQL data compare tool has to offer
Database Power Tools for VS Code
The new big thing in ApexSQL Database Power Tools for VS Code 2020 R6 version is the browsable code completion list for inserting MySQL and MariaDB keywords, database, schema, object, parameter, and variable names in the SQL statements AKA IntelliSense. This feature speeds up coding by inserting keywords, schemas, objects, etc. while typing queries.
For more details on the new release, please see the latest product update alert
What's cooking?
ApexSQL Audit 2020 R4
We are pleased to announce significant enhancements coming to the next minor version of our SQL Server audit and compliance solution
that will include, among other usability and quality improvements, features like:
Extended session settings - Customizable session settings to manage auditing data collection
Additional report header options - Extracted reports including more options to formalize the audit documentation
ApexSQL Manage 2020 R5
The upcoming version of the SQL Server instance management tool from the ApexSQL DBA family will have a new set of Security
rules to extend the range of health check analysis.
This new set of rules will provide DBAs with the possibility to perform high-level analysis to
test the security of SQL Server instance(s):
SQL Server files not on NTFS drives
Dynamic data masking
Operating system up to date
Database Master Keys Encrypted by Password
SQL browser service not enabled
Symmetric keys encrypted by certificate
Symmetric keys not created on system databases
CLR should be disabled
Common Criteria Compliance
Max number of concurrent sessions
Allow Updates to System Tables is disabled
Default Trace enabled
Error log files maximum number
Asymmetric Key Size
Full-Text search should not be installed
Hide SQL Instance
Replication component installed
Transparent data encryption enabled for databases
Server does not contain orphaned users
By executing the above set of rules, the SQL Server is examined and searched for any potential security issues and a comprehensive report is displayed to the DBA.
Quest Database Training Days Fall Series
Join the interactive performance tuning sessions delivered by industry experts, Brent Ozar, Janis Griffin, and Pinal Dave.
The next great opportunity for free SQL Server training from Oracle ACE Director Janis Griffin on the subject "Top Five MySQL Query Tuning Tips" is on September 29.
Attend this event if you want to learn how to simplify MySQL query tuning. See how to monitor and review the execution plan. Then, look at the table, column, and index information to
understand selectivity to find the driving table. Finally, find performance inhibitors. With her tips, you'll perform MySQL query tuning quickly and easily!
Use the checkboxes to select the events you wish to attend, then complete the form to register on this link.
DBA tools discounted at 20%
Now through September, get 20% off our already affordable tools that help you meet SQL Server
audit, compliance, and instance management; read SQL transaction logs, and recover data. Need
them all? We even have our bundled tools discounted.
Put them in your shopping cart and buy it now:
ApexSQL Audit: Meet SQL Server audit and compliance requirements for all instances across your enterprise.
Buy now! USD $1,359.20 $1699
ApexSQL Manage: Manage your SQL Server inventory, perform health checks, documentation, and comparison.
Buy now! USD $399.20 $499
ApexSQL Log: Read the SQL Server transaction logs to audit, replicate, and/or rollback changes.
Buy now! USD $1599.20 $1,999
ApexSQL Recover: Recover damaged, deleted, dropped, or lost data.
Buy now! USD $1,599.20 $1,999
[Best Value] ApexSQL DBA Suite: All 9 ApexSQL DBA tools, combined 65% savings, free support, and upgrades for a year, more!
Buy now! USD $1,759.20 $2,199
Offers expire on September 30, 2020.
Other news and fresh content
Here is some content posted since the last newsletter from the Solution center...
Executing a TempDB health check analysis of SQL Server instances - learn how to perform TempDB health checks for SQL Server instances to increase overall instance performance
Executing a health check analysis of the SQL Server instance Security category - this article covers part 1 of SQL instance security health check rules. The insight is given into the first set of rules by using the 3rd party solution, ApexSQL Manage
Top things you need in a SQL Server coding productivity tool - this article is a walkthrough of what every SQL Server coding productivity tool should have with examples of one such SQL complete add-in for SSMS and VS
What's new
Videos
Blog
Solution Center
Knowledgebase
SQL Shack
What's next
What's new
Here are our most recent releases:
ApexSQL Database Power Tools for VS Code 2020 R6
This release of ApexSQL Database Power Tools for VS Code 2020 R6 comes with: Browsable code completion list for inserting MySQL and MariaDB keywords, database, schema, object, parameter, and variable names in the SQL statements. Usability and quality improved with 10 bugs fixed
ApexSQL Data Diff for MySQL 2020
This release of ApexSQL Data Diff for MySQL 2020 comes with: MySQL data compare for databases. MySQL Server 5.6 or higher support. MariaDB Server 10.1 and higher support. Azure Database for MySQL support. Azure Database for MariaDB support. Amazon RDS for MySQL support. Amazon RDS for MariaDB support. Comparison options: Ignore case in table/view names, Ignore case in text data types, Ignore underscores in table/view names, Ignore new objects, Ignore leading and trailing spaces, Treat empty strings and nulls as equal. Synchronization options: Script Use for database. Object types to compare: Tables and views. Object mapping. Object filter. Export comparison results into 3 output types: HTML, CSV and Excel. Command line interface. GUI themes. High DPI and 4K resolution support. Visual Language Dictionary for Visual Studio for iconography and other imagery concepts applied. Application telemetry collects anonymous data on the use and performance of applications and application components. ApexSQL Updater configures advanced updating settings of all installed ApexSQL products
ApexSQL Model 2020
This release of ApexSQL Model 2020 comes with: Application telemetry now collects anonymous data on the use and performance of applications and application components. New ApexSQL Updater allows users to configure advanced updating settings of all installed ApexSQL products. Usability and quality improved with 1 bug fixed
ApexSQL DevOps toolkit 2020 R6
This release of ApexSQL DevOps toolkit 2020 R6 comes with: TeamCity plug-in: Support for TeamCity 2020.01.
ApexSQL
DevOps toolkit 2020 R5
This release of ApexSQL DevOps toolkit 2020 R5 comes with: Octopus deploy plug-in: Improved quality. Usability and quality improved with 2 bugs fixed
ApexSQL Analayze 2020
This release of ApexSQL Analyze 2020 comes with: 	Application telemetry now collects anonymous data on the use and performance of applications and application components. New ApexSQL Updater allows users to configure advanced updating settings of all installed ApexSQL products. Usability and quality improved with 1 bug fixed
See What's new for descriptions of all of our recent releases
Videos
Take a look at our most recent videos:
An introduction to ApexSQL Diff for MySQL
An introduction to ApexSQL Mask
Automated database lifecycle using ApexSQL continuous integration tools - Source control
Automated database lifecycle using ApexSQL continuous integration tools - Development
An introduction to ApexSQL Manage
Blog
Here are our most recent blog
posts:
ApexSQL Database Power Tools for VS Code 2020 R6 - Product update alert
ApexSQL Script 2020 R2 - Product update alert
ApexSQL Data Diff for MySQL 2020 - Product update alert
ApexSQL Model 2020 - Product update alert
What's new in ApexSQL Database Power Tools for VS Code 2020 R6
ApexSQL DevOps toolkit 2020 R6 - Product update alert
ApexSQL DevOps toolkit 2020 R5 - Product update alert
ApexSQL Data Diff for MySQL 2020 - Screen shot tour
ApexSQL Diff 2019 R3 - Product update alert
What's new in ApexSQL: ApexSQL Data Diff for MySQL
ApexSQL Refactor 2020 R4 - Product update alert
ApexSQL Analyze 2020 - Product update alert
Solution center
Our Solution center is a content site with in-depth articles focusing on tough nuts that DBAs and developers are challenged with
Here are our most recent articles:
MySQL search: Searching for data in tables
How to export MySQL data to HTML
Top things you need in a SQL Server coding productivity tool
Executing a health check analysis of the SQL Server instance Security category
Executing a TempDB health check analysis of SQL Server instances
Knowledgebase
Take a look at some tricks and how-to articles for ApexSQL tools at our knowledgebase
blog:
Exporting and importing database masks that will be used to mask SQL Server data
Automatic import of SQL Server instances
Perform health check analysis on SQL Server instance databases
How to manually unlink a database from SQL source control
Mask SQL Server data with the Use original generator
SQL Shack
Here is a list of all SQL Shack articles published since our last newsletter:
Explore Manual Snapshots in AWS RDS SQL Server
Suspend and Resume Data Movement in SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
Configure SQL Server Reporting Services databases in SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
Data Disaster Recovery with Log Shipping
Refresh SQL Server Always On Availability Group databases using DBATools PowerShell
How to prepare for the Exam DP-201: Designing an Azure Data Solution
Learn MySQL: Delete and Update Statements
Impact of dropping a login in the active directory tied to SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
Backup SQL databases on the AWS S3 bucket using Windows PowerShell
How to prepare for the Exam DP-200: Implementing an Azure Data Solution
Backup compression in TDE enabled databases in SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
Configuring ODBC drivers for Azure Database for MySQL
How to parse JSON in SQL Server
Manticore search: a continuation of the Sphinx search engine
How to prepare for the Exam DP-300: Administering Relational Databases on Microsoft Azure
Exporting SSRS reports to multiple worksheets in Excel
Exploring AG dashboards for monitoring SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
Automatic Page Repair in SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
How to prepare for the Exam AZ-900: Microsoft Azure Fundamentals
Getting started with Azure SQL Database using Azure CLI
Restore an existing availability group database participating in SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
How to create an AWS SageMaker Instance
Deploy MSDTC for distributed transactions in SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
Explore Cross-database MSDTC for distributed transactions in SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
SQL interview questions
An introduction to SSIS Data Lineage concepts
Understanding Data Lineage in ETL
Saving AWS Redshift costs with elastic resize
Getting started with Azure Automation
Learn SQL: SQL-Related Jobs
Configuring SQL Server replication for distribution databases in SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
Data Reduction Technique: Principal Component Analysis in Azure Machine Learning
Configure SQL Server replication for a database in SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
Saving AWS Redshift costs with scheduled pause and resume actions
Enhancing Customer Experiences with Subscriptions in SSRS
Transparent Data Encryption for SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
Working with AWS Neptune Graph Databases
Deep dive into IT Cloud Automation using PowerShell
Don't fear SQL Server performance tuning
Importing data from JSON files and Power BI Rest APIs into Power BI
Monitor and failover a Distributed SQL Server Always On Availability Group
How to backup SQL databases to an FTP server using the SSIS FTP Task
Deploy a distributed SQL Server Always On Availability Group
Test-driven database hotfix development (TDHD) with SQL unit test based framework (tSQLt)
Exploring databases in Python using Pandas
Getting started with AWS RDS Aurora DB Clusters
Migrating SQL workloads to Microsoft Azure: Planning the jump
T-SQL scripts to copy or remove files from a directory in SQL Server 2019
Importing Performance Monitor data into SQL databases
An overview of distributed SQL Server Always On Availability Groups
Uploading SQL data into Azure Blob Storage using SSIS
Introduction to SQLAlchemy in Pandas Dataframe
What's next
We've got a full development pipeline. Here is what will be coming out soon:
ApexSQL Audit 2020 R4
The upcoming release of ApexSQL Audit will include features such as: Extended session settings. Additional report header options. Usability and quality will be improved
ApexSQL Doc 2020
The upcoming release of ApexSQL Doc will include features such as: Application telemetry now collects anonymous data on the use and performance of applications and application components. New ApexSQL Updater allows users to configure advanced updating settings of all installed ApexSQL products. Server Analysis Services compatibility level for Tabular models 1500 support. Usability and quality will be improved
ApexSQL Manage 2020 R5
The upcoming release of ApexSQL Manage will include features such as: New set of Security rules are added to extend the range of health check analysis. Usability and quality will be improved
ApexSQL Database Power Tools for VS Code 2020 R7
The upcoming release of ApexSQL Database Power Tools for VS Code will include features such as: Format MySQL and MariaDB scripts using predefined profiles: Compact and Extended. Safely rename database objects in MySQL and MariaDB. Usability and quality will be improved
ApexSQL Mask 2020 R3
The upcoming release of ApexSQL Mask will include features such as: Masking data without data loss using dynamic data masks. Usability and quality will be improved
Stay tuned for more releases and new products on our
What's next page
Quest Software | 4 Polaris Way | Aliso Viejo, CA 92656 USA
Phone: 1-800-306-9329
Email:
questsalessupport@quest.com
