How to tune Nextcloud on-premise cloud server for better performance - TechRepublic
Join / Log In
View full profile
Preferences
Newsletters
Community
Upgrade to Premium
Log out
More
TechRepublic Premium
COVID-19
Developer
IT Policy Downloads
Security
Top DaaS providers
Excel tips
Cloud
Big Data
Learn Python: Online training
Top 2020 DevOps trends
Top IT salaries
TechRepublic Academy
Best VPN Services
See All Topics
Editions:
United States
Australia
United Kingdom
Japan
Newsletters
Forums
Resource Library
Search
Close
What are you looking for?
COVID-19
Developer
IT Policy Downloads
Security
Top DaaS providers
Excel tips
Cloud
Big Data
Learn Python: Online training
Top 2020 DevOps trends
Top IT salaries
TechRepublic Academy
Best VPN Services
How to tune Nextcloud on-premise cloud server for better performance
Jack Wallen
Cloud
on December 3, 2020, 7:52 AM PST
Jack Wallen offers tips on configuring Nextcloud for performance that should better meet your demands.
Image: Getty Images/iStockphoto
Nextcloud is, hands down, the best on-premise cloud server platform on the market. Not only is it easy to deploy, it's also reliable and expandable. However, out of the box, you might find the platform's performance doesn't quite meet your expectations. Fear not, there are ways you can eke out a bit more performance from the platform. Let me offer you up a few tips. SEE: Managing the multicloud (ZDNet/TechRepublic special feature) | Download the free PDF version (TechRepublic) 	What you'll need
In order to tune Nextcloud, you'll need a running instance of the platform. These tips should work with any iteration of Nextcloud from 16 on. You'll also need a user with sudo privileges.
Must-read cloud
Top cloud trends for 2021
5 programming languages cloud engineers should learn
AWS: 9 pro tips and best practices (free PDF)
Cloud computing policy (TechRepublic Premium)
How to enable caching
The first tip is to enable caching on your Nextcloud server. I've already covered this in my piece "How to enable caching on Nextcloud 16." With caching enabled, you increase performance by storing frequently requested objects in memory for faster retrieval. This should be one of the first configurations you take care of, in order to squeeze out as much performance as possible. Do take care, as enabling caching is a bit tricky.
How to enable HTTP2 HTTP2 is the latest HTTP protocol and allows web browsers to send multiple, simultaneous requests to a server. HTTP2 is well supported by Apache, so it's not at all challenging to enable. This is another issue I've tackled before, so you can easily enable HTTP2 on Apache by following the tutorial, "How to enable HTTP/2 Protocol on Ubuntu 16.04." How to optimize PHP-FPM The default PHP-FPM installation on your server might be the cause of excessive load times for Nextcloud--each request for an element is handled by a separate PHP-FPM process. By allowing numerous PHP-FPM processes to run, you should gain a considerable increase in performance. Here's what you need to do. Open the necessary configuration file for editing with the command: sudo nano /etc/php/7.X/fpm/pool.d/www.conf
Where X is your current installed version of PHP. In that file, you'll need to look for the following lines: pm = dynamic
pm.max_children = 120
pm.start_servers = 12
pm.min_spare_servers = 6
pm.max_spare_servers = 18
The above configuration changes will work for a server that has 4 GB of RAM and a 1 GB  MySQL cache. Edit the above options and save and close the file. Restart apache with the command: sudo systemctl restart apache2
Once you've taken care of the above optimizations, you should find that Nextcloud performs considerably better. As my last bit of advice, you might want to run these on a non-production environment, to ensure you nail the configurations. Once you see the increase in performance, you can then make the changes on your production environment. Subscribe to TechRepublic's How To Make Tech Work on YouTube for all the latest tech advice for business pros from Jack Wallen.
Cloud and Everything as a Service Newsletter
This is your go-to resource for XaaS, AWS, Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud Platform, cloud engineering jobs, and cloud security news and tips.
Delivered Mondays
Sign up today
Also see Multicloud: A cheat sheet (TechRepublic) 		Top IT certifications to increase your salary (free PDF) (TechRepublic) 		Power checklist: Local email server-to-cloud migration (TechRepublic Premium) 		Top cloud providers in 2020: AWS, Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud, hybrid, SaaS players (ZDNet) 		Cloud computing: More must-read coverage (TechRepublic on Flipboard)
Editor's Picks
TechRepublic Premium: The best IT policies, templates, and tools, for today and tomorrow.
MXLinux is the most downloaded Linux desktop distribution, and now I know why
Windows 10: How to flush the DNS cache to improve network performance
SpaceX Starlink beta: What it is and when you can get it
IBM report: Four things that will never be the same post-pandemic
Photos: 82 coolest virtual backgrounds to use in Zoom or Teams meetings
Comment and share: How to tune Nextcloud on-premise cloud server for better performance
By Jack Wallen
Jack Wallen is an award-winning writer for TechRepublic, The New Stack, and Linux New Media. He's covered a variety of topics for over twenty years and is an avid promoter of open source. For more news about Jack Wallen, visit his website jackwallen....
Full Bio
See all of Jack's content
Related Topics:
Cloud
Open Source
Enterprise Software
Security
Networking
Data Centers
Microsoft
Cloud on ZDNet
Show Comments
Hide Comments
LOG IN TO COMMENT
My Profile
Log out
| Commenting FAQs | Community Guidelines
Join Discussion
LOG IN TO COMMENT
Add your Comment
5 Linux server distributions you should be using
Scheduled systems outage checklist
A guide to The Open Source Index and GitHub projects checklist
Offshore work policy
Services
About Us
Manage Profile
Membership
Newsletters
RSS Feeds
Site Map
Site Help & Feedback
FAQ
Advertise
Reprint Policy
Do Not Sell My Information
Explore
Blogs
Downloads
TechRepublic Forums
Meet the Team
TechRepublic Academy
TechRepublic Premium
TechRepublic Premium
Resource Library
Photos
Videos
© 2021 ZDNET, A RED VENTURES COMPANY. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Privacy Policy
| Cookie Settings
| Terms of Use
| A ZDNet site
